[Music]
9 Atomic Energy Commission
created in 1946 and further empowered in
1954 as the sole agency responsible for
atomic energy management production and
control the Atomic Energy Commission
administered nuclear power matters for
almost two decades before a general
reorganization of the federal
government's energy policy structure
brought about its demise in 1975 the
Commission was the recipient of the
legacy of the Manhattan Project operated
by the Army Corps of Engineers for the
development of the atomic bomb during
the war since 1947 the agency has
maintained an Intelligence Unit under
various identifications director office
of security and intelligence 1954 to
1955 director division of intelligence
1955 to 1971 and assistant general
manager for national security 1972
through 1975 footnote the periods
indicated for these titles are
approximate and are based upon the
appearance of the referent in official
government organization manuals for the
years specified in footnote quote in the
period between 1949 when the first
Soviet nuclear test was reported and the
end of February 1958 the AEC announced
some 31 nuclear explosions as having
been detonated by the Soviet Union not
all Soviet atomic explosions are
publicly announced by the Commission nor
are full details given but information
about all such tests is quickly
communicated within the intelligence
community such information is a basic
requirement for officials responsible
for national security plans and programs
for example if the Soviets were known to
be conducting certain types of nuclear
tests these might reveal the state of
progress of hydrogen warheads for
ballistic missiles or progress in
developing defensive nuclear missiles
end quote
footnote Harry how ransom the
intelligence establishment Cambridge
Harvard University Press 1970
1:45 end quote this type of intelligence
is gathered through machinery such as
seismic devices and atmospheric sampling
procedures quote the United States has
maintained continuous monitoring of the
Earth's atmosphere to detect radioactive
particles from atomic tests samples of
atmosphere are collected in special
containers by u2 and other aircraft
flying at high altitudes AEC is able to
determine from these samples and other
data not only whether an atomic
explosion has occurred but also the
power and type of weapon detonated it
also conducts extensive research and
experimentation to prevent detection of
atomic explosions and methods of
penetrating any such protective
shielding as might be devised by another
nation end quote
the agency also utilizes its own
state-of-the-art techniques in nuclear
energy production to assess the status
of atomic power developments in foreign
countries quote the Atomic Energy
Commission is therefore a consumer and
producer of intelligence in the critical
national security field of nuclear
energy and is accordingly represented on
the US intelligence board by its
director division of intelligence the
AEC is vitally interested in receiving
data on foreign atomic energy or nuclear
weapons developments and provides
technical guidance to CIA and the
intelligence agencies of the Armed
Services in collecting these raw data
the AEC in turn becomes a producer of
intelligence when it produces
information on nuclear energy and
develops estimates as to the atomic
weapons capabilities of foreign powers
this processed intelligence is
disseminated to the National Security
Council the Armed Forces and others in
the intelligence establishment the
specific functions of the AEC
Intelligence Division are to keep the
AEC leadership informed on matters
relating to atomic energy policy in
formal terms the division formulates
intelligence policy and
coordinates intelligence operations it
sets the intelligence requirements of
the AEC which may be supplied by the
various operating arms of the
intelligence community it represents the
AEC in the interagency boards and
committees concerned with foreign
intelligence and it provides other
intelligence agencies with technical
information in the hope of assuring
competency in the collection and
evaluation of atomic energy intelligence
end quote in accordance with the
provisions of the energy reorganization
Act of 1974 the Atomic Energy Commission
was superseded by the energy research
and development administration and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission in January
1975 the first of these new agencies
assumed the old Commission's
intelligence functions the AEC assistant
general manager for national security
becoming the assistant administrator for
national security at erd a the new
administration and is also represented
on the United States intelligence board
[Music]
this is our hidden history